JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
We talked about what it takes to
unify, where
our differences were and how we
can bridge
these gaps.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In a bid for
party unity, House
Speaker Paul Ryan and other top
Republican
leaders meet with Donald Trump.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Thursday:
Brazil's unpopular President
Dilma Rousseff
is suspended and could be
removed from office,
in the wake of economic and
political turmoil.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we head to
Puerto Rico,
where the island battles to
contain an outbreak
of Zika virus.
AMARILYS ALVAREZ SANCHEZ,
Nutritionist (through
translator): There is a lack of
understanding
in sexual relations, and that
the virus can
be transmitted from the father
to the mother.
Women will laugh and say they're
already pregnant,
but they don't realize the need
for condoms.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Republican
presidential
drama shifted today to a new
stage, Washington.
The man who's now all but
certain to be the
party's presidential nominee
went behind closed
doors with party leaders who had
wanted someone
else.
John Yang has our report.
JOHN YANG: This morning, Donald
Trump went
to the headquarters of the
institution he's
shaken to its foundation, the
Republican Party.
He met for about an hour with
House Speaker
Paul Ryan, who has yet to
endorse Trump, chaperoned
by party chair Reince Priebus.
REINCE PRIEBUS, Republican
National Committee
Chairman: It was cooperative.
There was a
good spirit in the room. So, I'm
very hopeful.
I thought it was great.
JOHN YANG: In a joint statement,
Trump and
Ryan struck a conciliatory tone,
calling it:
"A great conversation. While we
were honest
about our few differences, we
recognize that
there are also many important
areas of common
ground and it was a very
positive step toward
unification."
In a news conference, ®MDNM-Ryan
stressed
the things that unite them.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House:
Look, here's what we agree on. A
Hillary Clinton
presidency would be a disaster
for this country.
It's effectively a third Obama
term, and the
other thing we all know is most
Americans
do not like where this country
is headed.
JOHN YANG: While there was still
no endorsement,
Ryan said it was a good
beginning to try to
meld Trump's populist followers
with Ryan's
small-government brand of
conservatism.
REP. PAUL RYAN: The question is,
what is it
that we need to do to unify the
Republican
Party and all strains of
conservative wings
in the party? We had a very good
and encouraging
productive conversation on just
how to do
that.
JOHN YANG: Later, Trump tweeted:
"Great day
in D.C. with Speaker Ryan and
Republican leadership.
Things working out really well."
In his news conference, Ryan
made clear there
are principles he will not
abandon.
REP. PAUL RYAN: Look, there are
just things
we really believe in as
conservatives. We
believe in limited government.
We believe
in the Constitution. We believe
in the proper
role of the differences and the
separations
of powers.
These are things that are
important to us,
and so we just had a good
exchange of views
on these kinds of issues.
JOHN YANG: Ryan's reluctance to
fully embrace
Trump reflects concerns by
Republican lawmakers
about facing voters this fall
with Trump at
the top of the ticket.
Norman Ornstein is a scholar at
the conservative
American Enterprise Institute.
He says Ryan
is walking a tightrope.
NORMAN ORNSTEIN, Resident
Scholar, American
Enterprise Institute: Ryan is a
smart guy
who understands that the Trump
candidacy for
an awful lot of voters is
radioactive. So,
partly, what Ryan was doing was
giving a little
cover for his colleagues in the
House when
they go out there to run,
showing that you
can get a little distance from
Trump without
completely trashing him and
alienating his
own backers.
JOHN YANG: Outside today's
meeting, a crush
of cameras and protests over
immigration created
a circus-like atmosphere.
PROTESTER: When our communities
are under
attack, what do we do?
PROTESTERS: Stand up, fight
back!
JOHN YANG: Congressional
Democrats seemed
to relish the Republicans'
apparent disarray,
Senate Minority Leader Harry
Reid jabbing
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell,
who also
met with Trump.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), Minority
Leader: Since
Senator McConnell has so
enthusiastically
embraced Trump, we can only
assume he agrees
with Trump's view that women are
dogs and
pigs.
We can only assume that the
Republican leader
is not repulsed by Donald
Trump's vulgar behavior
towards women.
JOHN YANG: But the Democrats'
presidential
contest continues to threaten
their own party
unity. Front-runner Hillary
Clinton was in
New York, and Bernie Sanders and
his underdog
campaign traveled to Mount
Rushmore, where
South Dakota holds its primary
on June 7.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm John
Yang on Capitol
Hill.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
A federal judge in Washington
struck down
federal spending to subsidize
health care
for low-income Americans. It
comes to $175
billion over a decade. House
Republicans argued
the Obama administration is
spending the money
without congressional approval,
and the judge
agreed. The White House plans an
appeal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Islamic State
suicide bombers
struck again in Iraq today, just
a day after
killing nearly 100 people in
Baghdad. This
time, they blew up two truck
bombs in the
recently liberated city of
Ramadi; 17 Iraqi
solders were killed.
Back in Baghdad, Prime Minister
Haider al-Abadi
visited victims of yesterday's
attacks. And
two more bombings in the city
killed five
people today.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Syria, a
cease-fire expired
in Aleppo, and fighting flared
north of the
city. Government forces battled
rebels for
control of a district just north
of the city.
It sits on the supply route to
rebel-held
portions of Aleppo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
powered up
an $800 million missile shield
in Romania
today, drawing the ire of
Russia. The site
has been in the works for years
to stave off
potential ballistic missiles
fired toward
Europe. U.S. and NATO officials
attended today's
ceremony at the remote Romanian
site.
Deputy Defense Secretary Robert
Work insisted
the focus is on Iran, and not
Moscow.
ROBERT WORK, U.S. Deputy Defense
Secretary:
It was never, ever about Russia.
We have offered
to the Russians to show them the
technical
specs. We have done everything
we can to try
to make sure that they
understand the capability
of the system and why it doesn't
pose any
type of a threat to their
strategic deterrence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Even so, a senior
Russian Foreign
Ministry official called the
shield part of
-- quote -- "the military and
political containment
of Russia." He said the move
will hurt efforts
to repair ties with NATO.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Turkey lashed
out at the
European Union today over
letting Turks travel
within the E.U. without visas.
It's part of
an agreement to curb the flow of
migrants.
But the E.U. says the deal also
calls for
Turkey to reform its terrorism
laws, and not
to target journalists and
political opponents.
In Ankara today, Turkish
President Recep Tayyip
Erdogan said that issue is an
internal matter.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): You see the E.U.'s
attitude.
What is it? The E.U. says we
should soften
our stance in fight against
terrorism and
against terror organizations.
Since when have
you, the E.U., started to govern
Turkey?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Since the
migrant deal took
effect, the numbers crossing
from Turkey have
fallen dramatically. Still, the
E.U. today
allowed five member countries to
maintain
new border controls for another
six months.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The government of
Malaysia
says two more pieces of debris
have been found
from Malaysia Airlines Flight
370. The jetliner
disappeared more than two years
ago off Western
Australia, with 239 people on
board. The latest
debris was discovered in South
Africa and
on Rodrigues Island off
Mauritius. But they
offer no clue as to what
happened to the plane.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Back in this
country, Senate
negotiators have agreed on $1.1
billion in
emergency funding to fight the
Zika virus.
That's less than President Obama
wanted, and
it's likely to be reduced
further in the House.
Zika is linked to severe birth
defects and
has spread across the Americas.
But health
officials are not predicting
widespread outbreaks
in the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: U.S. energy
companies are going
to have to find ways to cut
methane emissions
by nearly half over the next
decade. The Environmental
Protection Agency issued a final
rule today.
It says producers have to repair
leaks at
wellheads and capture gas that
escapes during
hydraulic fracturing, or
fracking. The mandate
takes effect this summer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Wall Street
had a lackluster
day. The Dow Jones industrial
average gained
nine points to close at 17720.
The Nasdaq
fell 23 points, and the S&P 500
slipped a
fraction.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Pope Francis
is signaling
openness to a greater role for
women in the
Roman Catholic Church. He agreed
today to
have a commission study whether
to allow female
deacons. They'd preside over
weddings and
funerals, plus other functions.
But the pope gave no indication
that he'd
consider admitting women to the
priesthood.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Still to come
on the "NewsHour":
Brazil's president suspended
amid corruption
charges; new details in the
doping charges
against Russian athletes; Puerto
Rico learns
to cope with Zika; Making Sense
of grit and
what it takes to succeed; and
much more.
Months of political turmoil in
Brazil reached
a divisive climax early today,
as Dilma Rousseff,
president of South America's
largest nation,
found herself on the losing end
of a vote
in Brazil's Senate that could
ultimately remove
her from office.
Dilma Rousseff emerged from the
presidential
palace in Brasilia this morning
to throngs
of cheering, flag-waving
supporters. She greeted
the crowd, and declared her
defiance.
DILMA ROUSSEFF, Brazilian
President (through
translator): This process is a
coup, because
it's an impeachment without a
crime. I didn't
commit a crime of
responsibility. I am being
the target, a victim of a great
injustice.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rousseff's
impassioned speech
came just hours after Brazil's
Senate voted
55-22 to remove her from office,
at least
temporarily. Her critics
included another
former president who was
impeached in 1992.
FERNANDO COLLOR DE MELLO, Former
President
of Brazil (through translator):
We arrived
at the peak of a crisis. We have
arrived at
the ruin of a government, at the
ruin of a
country. The greatest crime of
responsibility
is in the irresponsibility and
disregard of
politics, the irresponsibility
for the deterioration
of the economy of a country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Supporters of
Rousseff,
including Brazil's attorney
general, branded
the move a historic injustice.
JOSE EDUARDO CARDOZO, Brazilian
Attorney General
(through translator): An honest
and innocent
woman, right at this moment, IS
being condemned.
A judicial presence is being
used to oust
a legitimately elected
president. An innocent
person is being condemned.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Outside,
pro-Rousseff demonstrators
briefly clashed with police. But
in cities
across the country, there were
fireworks celebrating
the vote. The divisions were
evident everywhere.
MAN (through translator): I used
to like Dilma
a lot, but at this moment I
think Brazil should
be congratulated, and I am sure
things will
get much better.
WOMAN (through translator): It
is very saddening
to know that an honest woman
will lose the
presidency and was judged by
criminals.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The drive to
take down Rousseff
began last year as anger spread
over an extensive
corruption scandal at Petrobras,
Brazil's
state-owned oil company.
Rousseff herself
was never implicated in the
corruption. Instead,
she was charged with
manipulating government
accounts to cover up the
country's deficit.
She insisted her decisions were
entirely legal.
DILMA ROUSSEFF (through
translator): I carried
out those actions. These actions
have been
taken by all the presidents of
the republic
who have been in office.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Even so, the
impeachment
process morphed into a
referendum on Rousseff's
entire presidency, as the worst
downturn in
decades laid waste to the
country's economy.
Simon Romero is the Brazil
bureau chief for
The New York Times.
SIMON ROMERO, The New York
Times: There was
a booming economy back in the
previous decade.
It was an emerging powerhouse on
the global
stage. But Brazil's own
recession has just
become so severe and the wounds
to the economy
are to be self-inflicted by the
policies that
Dilma Rousseff was championing
just a few
years ago, that really her
government just
became unsustainable in that
sense.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Rousseff was
elected president
in 2010, the first woman to hold
the office.
She'd once belonged to a Marxist
guerrilla
group and was tortured during
years of a military
dictatorship. But she endured,
and ultimately
became chief of staff in the
administration
of popular leftist President
Luiz Inacio Lula
da Silva, during which 30
million people were
brought out of poverty. Rousseff
was his handpicked
successor.
Now the Senate has 180 days to
hold a trial,
and decide whether to make her
removal permanent.
She insisted today she's far
from finished.
DILMA ROUSSEFF (through
translator): We will
remain united, mobilized, and
peaceful. We
are those that know how to fight
the daily
fight.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For now, the
75-year-old
vice president, Michel Temer, is
acting president.
He's promised to cut spending
and privatize
many state-controlled sectors,
but he's also
been implicated in the Petrobras
scandal.
SIMON ROMERO: The most recent
poll by one
of the country's biggest polling
companies
put his approval ratings in the
single digits,
and only 2 percent of the
respondents in that
poll said that they would vote
for him for
president. So he's really
starting with low
expectations at this point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All of this as
Brazil is
struggling with the Zika virus.
And in just
under three months, Rio de
Janeiro will host
the Olympic Games.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: new
revelations about
an elaborate scheme of alleged
doping at the
2014 Winter Olympics. A top
Russian Olympic
official says that his
government orchestrated
a plan to supply dozens of
athletes with
performance-enhancing
drugs.
The head of Russia's anti-doping
lab during
the competition in Sochi,
Russia, Grigory
Rodchenkov, told The New York
Times he created
a cocktail of drugs for a
state-run doping
program that included 15 medal
winners. Among
those alleged to have received
drugs are members
of the cross-country ski team
and two bobsledders
who won two gold medals.
Russian officials deny the
accusations.
Rebecca Ruiz is one of The Times
reporters,
and she joins me now.
Rebecca, thank you for talking
with us.
There have been rumors, I guess,
in the air
for a long time about banned
substances being
used by Russian athletes. What
exactly did
you learn?
REBECCA RUIZ, The New York
Times: Well, not
just rumors, Judy. It's
fascinating, because
Russia does lead the world in
doping violations
among its athletes
internationally.
But what is fascinating, Mr.
Rodchenkov provided
incredible details that in many
ways validated
a report that came out last
fall. It was published
by the World Anti-Doping Agency,
and it was
the result of an
almost-year-long inquiry.
He confirmed a lot of what the
WADA report
had said broadly.
The WADA report said that at the
Olympic laboratory
in Sochi in 2014, there had been
a police
presence, that FSB officers, the
Russian police,
had been present on site in the
laboratory.
Some had been seen in lab coats.
He provided details that some of
those agents
he worked with every night to
substitute out
the tainted urine of top Russian
athletes
who were expected to win medals
at the Games.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, essentially,
he is saying
the government was behind this?
REBECCA RUIZ: He is saying that
the sports
ministry gave him direct orders
to operate,
to follow -- to execute these
orders and to
-- quote, unquote -- "win at any
cost."
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Rebecca, why
is he, why
is Mr. Rodchenkov coming
forward? Why is he
talking?
REBECCA RUIZ: Well, ahead of the
Summer Games
in Rio, which are in three
months, Mr. Rodchenkov
said he wants it known that
there is state-sponsored
doping in Russia, that a lot of
these athletes
who are due to compete in Rio,
he said, without
providing names of those
competing in the
Summer Games, that they have
been on his three-drug
cocktail in years past.
And, meanwhile, track and field
athletes,
Russia's track and field
athletes were suspended
from global competition in the
wake of the
report last fall. So, currently,
officials
are deciding whether that ban
will be lifted
in advance of the Olympics in
August.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We saw that the
Russian government
is saying it isn't true. He said
this is simply
a continuation of the
information attack on
Russian sport.
REBECCA RUIZ: Yes, that's what
officials told
us as well, and we absolutely
included their
denials of our allegations. We
reached out
to the six sports federations
whose athletes
were implicated, whose names we
had in this
spreadsheet that showed dozens
of athletes
who competed at the Sochi Games
who Mr. Rodchenkov
says doped throughout the games
and many of
whom captured medals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is Mr. Rodchenkov
safe in the
United States? I ask because you
report that
two of his former close
colleagues back in
Russia died unexpectedly a few
months ago,
just within a few weeks of each
other.
REBECCA RUIZ: That's correct.
In fact, he departed in
November. He fled
to the United States, fearing
for his safety.
He went to Los Angeles. We're
not giving any
specifics about his location
beyond that.
But two of his close colleagues
from the anti-doping
world did die unexpectedly,
suddenly, in February
within weeks of each other.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just finally,
Rebecca,
is the International Olympic
Committee, is
anyone investigating this now?
REBECCA RUIZ: We contacted the
International
Olympic Committee today. They
said that they
were worried about these very
detailed allegations,
and they called on WADA, the
World Anti-Doping
Agency, to act and to
investigate his specific
claims.
WADA, meanwhile, has had board
meetings today
in Canada, and we have been
unable to connect
with any WADA official by phone
and to get
specific answers to our
questions. But they
have said that they are looking
into allegations
of doping by Russian athletes
throughout the
Olympic Games in Sochi, not just
before the
Games, in the lead-up to the
Games, as Mr.
Rodchenkov also said happened at
past competitions,
leading up to Beijing, leading
up to London.
But he says that, throughout the
entirety
of the Sochi Games, Russian
athletes were
doping.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, quite a
story.
Rebecca Ruiz, who reported on
this for The
New York Times, we thank you.
REBECCA RUIZ: Thank you very
much, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now the second in
our two-part
series about Puerto Rico's major
troubles.
The Zika outbreak is hitting the
island sharply
this spring. And it's expected
to get worse,
a source of major concern for
women living
and visiting there.
Jeffrey Brown recently went to
Puerto Rico
to see how officials are
grappling with Zika.
JEFFREY BROWN: At the emergency
operations
center in San Juan last week, it
was day 90
in the island's battle with
Zika.
HECTOR COLON, Deputy Director,
Puerto Rico
Department of Health: There is
in red has
26 to 50 cases.
JEFFREY BROWN: This center is
used to dealing
with hurricanes and other
emergencies. But
priority number one now is the
mosquito-borne
virus that's been spreading here
since last
December, with some 785 cases so
far.
Deputy Director Hector Colon
showed us how
teams stay in touch with
hospitals, and call
individuals to offer counseling
and information
on how to protect their
families. The most
urgent focus is on pregnant
women.
HECTOR COLON: We monitor
especially the pregnant
women that test positive to
Zika. We offer
them to do a test. And the ones
that test
positive, we monitor them very
closely once
they give birth.
JEFFREY BROWN: The fear is that
Puerto Ricans
will experience what was first
seen in Brazil:
babies born with abnormally
small heads and
brain damage, a condition known
as microcephaly.
Mysteries abound with Zika,
including why
birth defects occur and who is
most susceptible.
Most adults who get the virus
have few or
no symptoms.
Puerto Rico, with its warm and
wet climate,
its economy in a shambles, is a
prime breeding
ground for mosquitoes and the
virus they bring.
No cases of microcephaly have
been reported
here so far, but there has been
one death
associated with the virus, and
the Centers
for Disease Control predicts
that an astounding
20 percent of the island's 3.5
million people
will likely contract Zika this
year, all this
while the government is
defaulting on its
debt and cutting back on
services.
In San Juan, we found a range of
reactions.
WOMAN: I'm not afraid of Zika.
JEFFREY BROWN: Why not? Why not?
WOMAN: I guess because it hasn't
been near
by me. I have never met anyone
who has been
sick of Zika or any kind of
danger about the
mosquitoes.
MAN: It's dangerous.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes? Are you
afraid?
MAN: Yes, I'm a little, because
the women
are pregnant have a lot of
consequences because
of the mosquito that bites and
it has the
virus, the Zika.
JEFFREY BROWN: Mosquito-borne
diseases are
nothing new here. But Zika
presents major
new challenges, to understand
it, prevent
it, to educate people about it,
while avoiding
fear and panic.
At a women, infant and children,
or WIC, center,
we watched a counseling session
for two pregnant
women.
Neither Katherine Merced nor
Nicole Ramirez
has contracted Zika, but they
told us they
had plenty of questions.
NICOLE RAMIREZ, Expecting Mother
(through
translator): In the first three
months of
pregnancy, I heard that Off had
a chemical
that could lead to
complications, so I didn't
put it on.
KATHERINE MERCED, Expecting
Mother (through
translator): I'm terrified,
worried more than
anybody, because it could be
sexually transmitted
to me.
JEFFREY BROWN: In fact, says
nutritionist
Amarilys Alvarez Sanchez,
repellents such
as Off are safe, but Zika can
still be transmitted
sexually.
AMARILYS ALVAREZ SANCHEZ,
Nutritionist (through
translator): There is a lack of
understanding
in sexual relations, and that
the virus can
be transmitted from the father
to the mother.
Women will laugh and say they're
already pregnant,
but they don't realize the need
for condoms.
JEFFREY BROWN: Condoms must be
used, that
is, even after a woman is
pregnant.
In a nearby room, CDC behavioral
scientist
Melissa Mercado conducted a
focus group to
learn what women know about
Zika, what questions
they have, and where public
education efforts
might reach them.
MELISSA MERCADO, Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention: We are trying to
reach to
the women, so we also need to
know what types
of media they are using, so that
the message
actually gets to her and to them
in a way
that it's most accessible and
clear. We want
information to be clear in what
they need
to know to protect themselves
and their babies.
JEFFREY BROWN: In the meantime,
research goes
on at CDC labs on the outskirts
of San Juan.
Roberto Barrera heads a team in
the entomology
and ecology section that's
studying Zika-transmitting
yellow-fever mosquitoes to
better understand
how to eradicate them.
DR. ROBERTO BARRERA, Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention: You're looking
at thousands
of eggs.
JEFFREY BROWN: It's a big
problem, since they
have built up resistance to
permethrin, the
most commonly used insecticide.
Dr. Barrera showed us a strain
raised in the
lab.
DR. ROBERTO BARRERA: So, you
compare the response
of a local mosquito and with
this mosquito
that has been in a lab for so
long. And you
compare, and you can evaluate
the degree of
resistance to the insecticide
that you're
testing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Field workers set
traps like
these around the island to
gather mosquito
eggs, which are then raised in
the lab.
So, this is where you bring the
live mosquitoes
to test the insecticides?
In a separate trailer, Barrera
and other researchers
try out different insecticides
and use timers
to measure the effect.
DR. ROBERTO BARRERA: The idea is
to raise
the survival or the mortality.
JEFFREY BROWN: Higher-tech
equipment was being
used in the diagnostic
laboratory next door,
where scientists study samples
of the virus
to distinguish it from other
mosquito-borne
illnesses, such as dengue, that
are also endemic
to the island.
Dr. Jorge Munoz heads this one.
DR. JORGE MUNOZ, Centers for
Disease Control
and Prevention: What made me
worry was the
diagnostic of the disease. We
knew that separating
Zika from dengue is difficult in
the laboratory.
We need a specific test to be
able to separate
them, to tell them apart.
JEFFREY BROWN: Munoz says his
team has developed
a test that's being tried out in
labs around
the Caribbean region. But it's
just a beginning,,
with much still to learn about
the disease,
its impact, and how to treat it.
As of now, there is no vaccine.
Do you worry, as a scientist?
You see what
happens in the public, right?
There gets a
sense of panic.
DR. JORGE MUNOZ: That's right.
JEFFREY BROWN: And that could
overrun the
science, right, or the pace of
the science.
DR. JORGE MUNOZ: Yes, it put us
a test. We
need to react and provide
solutions very quickly.
JEFFREY BROWN: Puerto Rico
Governor Alejandro
Garcia Padilla expressed his
concerns to me
about fears he said were
overblown and based
on ignorance.
GOV. ALEJANDRO GARCIA PADILLA,
Puerto Rico:
Anyone can travel to Puerto
Rico. The U.S.
Olympic team will go to Rio in a
couple of
months. And that's the mecca of
Zika. So it's
safe to travel here. But if the
woman is pregnant
or trying to, then they should
avoid to come
to Puerto Rico or to go to
Central Florida.
JEFFREY BROWN: It was a
not-so-subtle reminder
that concerns such as the ones
these pregnant
mothers have may soon become
more common on
the mainland.
From San Juan, Puerto Rico, I'm
Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS NewsHour."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": new
evidence
of the shrinking middle class;
what a political
journalist learned by taking his
son to work;
and music concerts for animals.
But first: What drives a person
to become
successful? That's the question
behind MacArthur
genius fellow and University of
Pennsylvania
psychology professor Angela
Duckworth's research.
She pins it on grit, an
intangible, but essential
trait.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman spent
a day with her in Philadelphia
to try to figure
out what that trait is made up
of. It's part
of our weekly Making Sense
report, which airs
every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
ROBERTO DIAZ, Curtis Institute
of Music in
Philadelphia: As the sound
opens, we have
to have the vibrato open more.
PAUL SOLMAN: World-renowned
violist Roberto
Diaz. Diaz now heads the
tuition-free Curtis
Institute of Music in
Philadelphia, the hardest
college in America to get into,
where he's
taught for years.
But what sets Diaz and his
students apart?
ROBERTO DIAZ: What we do here is
teach students
how to work and motivate
themselves over a
very long period of time.
PAUL SOLMAN: That pretty much
defines grit,
the catchword concept of
psychologist Angela
Duckworth and subject of her new
book, "Grit:
The Power of Passion and
Perseverance."
ANGELA DUCKWORTH, Author, "Grit:
The Power
of Passion and Perseverance":
Nobody gets
to be good at something without
effort, no
matter what your aptitude is.
And grit is
about the effort part of the
equation, right?
Grit says, you know, whatever
your talent
is, you're going to have to
invest effort
in order to develop skill.
PAUL SOLMAN: For years now,
Professor Duckworth
has been on a mission: to teach
grit to those
who lack it. When she began her
career as
an inner-city teacher:
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: It struck me
that the gap
between my highest-achieving and
my lowest-achieving
kids was yawning. How can we get
kids to do
better, and in particular the
kids who I could
tell from interacting with them
had the aptitude,
had the talent, to learn what I
was asking
them to learn, but weren't?
PAUL SOLMAN: So, Duckworth
became a psychologist,
working in recent years on a
grit curriculum
at KIPP charter schools.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: Clap twice.
Put up your
right hand. Put up your left
hand.
PAUL SOLMAN: Like the Infinity
Middle School
in New York City's Harlem that
we visited
not too long ago.
But is grit a function of nature
or nurture?
To Duckworth, it's a silly
question, because
grit is like most traits.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: It's partly
genetic. But
human beings could learn to be
grittier.
PAUL SOLMAN: But to teach grit,
Duckworth
thinks, you first need to
understand it, see
it in action. So we spent a day
in her hometown
of Philadelphia.
What could KIPP kids learn from
a viola virtuoso
about grit? Passion,
perseverance, payoff,
even if only to yourself.
ROBERTO DIAZ: Many of these
details that we
spend countless hours on may not
be noticed
at all.
It's connecting a note, a
certain way from
here to there, and then that one
to the next
one. The emotional content in
that phrase
is what will actually make a
difference to
you. And this is the kind of
detail, that
that kind of work never ends. It
never ends.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: If you look at
true experts,
they never get bored, right,
because what
they find is ever, ever greater
nuance in
what they do.
PAUL SOLMAN: They become
immersed, says Duckworth,
and then grit isn't a grind, but
more like
an act of grace. That ducks the
big question,
though.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: Why do some
people try,
try again, and why do some
people not? That's
what I'm after.
PAUL SOLMAN: Looking for an
answer, Duckworth
developed a quiz called The Grit
Scale, and
tested it out at West Point. She
found that
grit mattered more than
intelligence, leadership
quality, even physical fitness
in predicting
which entering plebes would
finish boot camp.
Local super chef Marc Vetri
confirms it. Which
young cooks will survive his
kitchen? Their
grit helps him spot them faster
than pasta
reaches al dente.
MARC VETRI, Chef: It's not
always the sharpest
guys. It's not always the guys
with the most
skill. It's just the guys or the
girls that
have the biggest work ethic. And
that's the
grit, I think.
MAN: Say when, chef.
PAUL SOLMAN: Vetri's grit has
certainly paid
off. He recently sold five of
his restaurants
to Philly-based Urban
Outfitters. Vetri started
out gritty.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: But you did
get more gritty,
more passionate, more resilient.
I don't know.
MARC VETRI: It's interesting.
Yes, it's interesting.
And your experiences, right,
once they start
to work for you, you know what?
Hey, that
worked. Maybe I really need to
start acting
like this more often.
PAUL SOLMAN: Duckworth is trying
to promote
the early teaching of restraint,
self-control,
delay of gratification, long
enough so their
benefits become apparent.
JANE GOLDEN, Philadelphia Mural
Arts Program:
This mural was created three
years ago.
PAUL SOLMAN: Jane Golden, who
heads the city's
Mural Arts Program, may be, says
Duckworth,
the city's grittiest individual.
JANE GOLDEN: My father used to
say, you're
like -- you're dogged, you're
like a dog with
a bone, you're -- you know,
failure is not
a permanent state. It's just
not.
PAUL SOLMAN: Golden took us to
see "Family
Interrupted" made in a prison,
then transferred
to this wall.
The lead artist for the mural,
Eric Okdeh,
also worked with the prisoners
to show the
impact of their incarceration.
Q.R. Codes
are used to tell their stories
in their own
words.
MAN: I said man, you know what?
I'm ashamed
to be in here. I ain't got no
reason to be
in prison. I'm smart. I'm
ashamed of myself.
JANE GOLDEN: Every person we
keep out of the
prison system is a victory.
Every young person
who graduates from high school
and moves on
to higher ed, that is fantastic.
PAUL SOLMAN: Turning negative
energy into
positive energy, through passion
and purpose.
So, then is grit also the answer
to economic
success, to a gratifying life?
ALFIE KOHN, Author, "Myth of the
Spoiled Child":
There's a very big difference
between helping
kids to decide whether and when
to be gritty,
and to deify or romanticize the
concept of
grit as inherently valuable.
PAUL SOLMAN: Educator Alfie Kohn
is a grit
skeptic.
ALFIE KOHN: I don't want
children, or adults,
for that matter, to be fearful
that if they
say this isn't working, I don't
derive pleasure
from this, I'm going to move on
to something
else, that they will be accused
of not being
sufficiently single-minded or
having enough
stick-to-itiveness.
PAUL SOLMAN: Moreover, says
Kohn:
ALFIE KOHN: These concepts have
the effect
of blaming kids in dire
circumstances for
their circumstances, instead of
looking at
how poverty and racial
discrimination hold
kids back.
PAUL SOLMAN: Duckworth concedes
the point,
to a degree.
ANGELA DUCKWORTH: I think grit
is a very important
thing to being successful, but
it's also important
to have a situation, have a --
have a life
that has opportunities for you
to do well,
right? And that's separate from
your grit.
And the other thing I would say
grit is not
a substitute for is having
values, you know,
empathy for other people, other
aspects of
character. So, grit is an
important thing,
but I don't think it's the only
thing.
PAUL SOLMAN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent Paul
Solman, reporting
from Philadelphia on a story
that required
no delay of gratification at
all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We have spent
much time
this year talking about the
travails of the
middle class. Now a new analysis
shows how
it's shrinking in most U.S.
metro areas.
From Boston to Goldsboro, North
Carolina,
to Midland, Texas, to Seattle,
there are fewer
adults living in middle class
households across
the country than there were in
2000. The analysis
by the Pew Research Center found
that in 160
metro areas, there was an
increase of lower-income
households. And 172 metro areas
saw a rise
in upper-income households.
This year, we're teaming up with
American
Public Media's Marketplace and
PBS' "Frontline"
on how economic forces are
affecting Americans.
It's called How the Deck Is
Stacked.
And the host of Marketplace, Kai
Ryssdal,
joins us again.
Kai, just so we're all on the
same page, who
is really middle class vs. who
thinks they're
middle class?
KAI RYSSDAL, Marketplace: So,
for the purposes
of this study, Hari, it goes
like this.
Anybody making from two-thirds
to twice the
median income in this country.
So, it's $47,000
to about $125,000, if you want
to run the
numbers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, those are
the folks
that are actually in the middle
class. But
we kind of feel like there are a
lot of people
in the middle class, a lot of
people who would
want to self-identify as a
member of the middle
class. I'm the average Joe.
KAI RYSSDAL: Right, that's what
we are in
this country. Right? We are
aspirational.
We want inclusive prosperity.
If you stop seven people -- 10
people on the
street, probably seven of them
would say I
am the middle class. And that's
why this study
matters, right, because what
happens in this
economy is that the middle class
drives it.
The middle class are the
consumers. Right?
Their upper ends are the
investors. The lower
end are getting by. The middle
class are the
consumers in this economy.
And so what this study really
says is, this
is bad news for the future of
economic growth
in this country, and that's why
it matters.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As we pointed
out, there
were some places where the
middle class got
smaller because people got
richer and there
were other places where the
middle class got
smaller because people got
poorer. A couple
of those different locations,
examples?
KAI RYSSDAL: Yes.
So, there are some really good
ones in this
study. So, if you look at
Goldsboro, North
Carolina, right, it used to be a
railroad
junction. It used to have a big
Air Force
base by it. It is an old-economy
town. It
is a town that is seeing the
economy go away
from it.
And right in that town, you see
more people
sliding from the middle class to
the lower
class. They're having a tougher
time getting
by. If you look at a place like
Midland, Texas,
which the Pew Research folks
polled out, Midland,
Texas, is an energy economy.
The energy economy in the last
15 years in
this country has been doing
really well, and
so people there are moving from
the middle
class to the upper class. It's
not a zero-sum
game, but this economy is
changing, and that's
what's driving this entire study
and the fate
of the middle class.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now, we have
heard of the
middle class declining in rural
areas. Is
there a difference when we see
that this as
such a big deal in metro cities
as well?
KAI RYSSDAL: Well, the root of
this study
is income inequality, right?
And we have known about it for a
long time
in the rural areas. It is now
coming to these
things called metropolitan
statistical areas,
these big centers of population,
some big,
some less big, where the bulk of
the population
in this country lives.
Wages have been stagnant in this
economy for
decades now, right, which means
incomes and
household wealth are stagnant,
which means
there is more income inequality.
And when
you have income inequality, you
have more
going to the low end, you have
more going
to the high end, and those
drivers of prosperity
in America are getting, as you
said in the
beginning, hollowed out.
HARI SREENIVASAN: How does this
square with
the people you have been talking
in the series
you're working on as you report
this?
KAI RYSSDAL: Well, here's the
thing.
I'm going out in the field next
week to talk
to a couple that we first met in
a coffee
shop about six months ago here
in downtown
Los Angeles. They're both
teachers. One of
them has a master's degree. They
are literally
the epitome of the American
middle class.
Right? You think, if they can't
make it on
a teacher's salary, then
something is up.
Here's the deal. We were sitting
there chatting
over a cup of coffee and a piece
of pie. And
the husband said to me: "We have
given up.
We're done. We know we're never
going to own
a house. We're never going to
grow beyond
the middle class. We're buried
in student
debt. We don't really know if
we're going
to be able to afford to send our
child to
school."
And they have given up, and that
tells what
you is at root in this study.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Marketplace's
Kai Ryssdal, thanks so much.
KAI RYSSDAL: You bet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the latest
addition to the
"NewsHour" bookshelf, a
diagnosis of Asperger's
syndrome leads one father to
consider what
kind of role he should play in
his son's life.
I recently spoke with Ron
Fournier, journalist
and senior political columnist
for "The National
Journal," about his new book,
"Love That Boy:
What Two Presidents, Eight Road
Trips, and
My Son Taught Me About a
Parent's Expectations."
Ron Fournier, welcome.
RON FOURNIER, Author, "Love That
Boy: What
Two Presidents, Eight Road
Trips, and My Son
Taught Me About a Parent's
Expectations":
Thanks for having me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Your book has
struck a nerve.
I think it -- maybe it's because
you bring
us along on your journey to
understand your
son. How did you decide to do
that?
RON FOURNIER: My wife said,
you're going to
do this. My wife, Lori, is a
remarkable woman
who literally, the day we got
him diagnosed,
we were walking out of the
doctor's office,
and all I was concerned about
was how this
was going to affect me, and can
my boy not
play sports, and all the things
that a self-involved
father might.
And Lori said, it's time to step
up. You have
got to step out and get him out
in the world,
where we can start learning
things that we
thought up until then -- he was
12 at the
time -- that we thought were
uncomfortable
to him, but we just learned,
because of the
autism, was actually unnatural
to him.
And I had to step up and spend
more time with
him. I had spent a lot of time,
as we do in
this town -- I'm on the road,
away from the
family. So she said, get out. I
want you to
go to presidential libraries,
presidential
sites.
His fixation at the time was
history. And
that was the job, covering the
presidency.
It kept me away from him. So she
sent us out
on these road trips.
JUDY WOODRUFF: People know what
autism is,
but they're not as familiar with
Asperger's.
Tell us what that is.
RON FOURNIER: Asperger's
syndrome is on the
high end of the autism spectrum,
meaning these
are young men and women who are
fairly functional,
but they don't have the social
graces that
we're born with.
They don't know naturally how to
make eye
contact, how to modulate your
voice, how to
shake hands, how to hold a
conversation and
read the social clues coming off
of somebody.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And why did your
wife, Lori,
think that taking Tyler, your
son, around
to visit your work, why did she
think that
would make a difference?
RON FOURNIER: Well, she knew
that I had to
be more involved in his life, in
our children's
life. I had spent a lot of time
working. And
we had just learned from the
doctor that,
although the social graces
aren't inherent
in Aspies, which is what they're
called, they
can be learned.
For one thing, these kids happen
to be off-the-chart
smart. If you get them in
settings and constantly
repeat to them, here's how you
shake hands,
here's how you look people in
the eyes, here's
how you have a conversation,
they can learn
those things.
So, we were right at the
beginning of the
process, literally within the
first 15 minutes,
and she said, get him out in the
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You have your son
meet presidents,
former presidents, but you do it
in a very
natural way.
What do you think makes these
encounters,
these sessions Tyler has with,
say, Bill Clinton,
feel like a real conversation?
RON FOURNIER: I don't think it
was me. I think
it was Bill Clinton and George
Bush, and,
to a briefer extent, he had a
brief meeting
with a -- just a grip-and-grin
at a Christmas
party with the Obamas.
It says something about the
three of them,
those three couples, or those
three presidents
and first lady Michelle Obama. I
can be awfully
cynical in my job. And I love
holding powerful
people accountable. And I'm
proud of what
I have done. But it's easy to
forget these
are human beings who are public
servants.
And President Bush and Clinton,
to different
degrees, wanted to connect with
Tyler. They
were doing a favor, not for me.
Neither one
of them had anything to gain
from me. But
this was a young man who was
struggling with
autism, who had a fascination
with the presidency.
And so they did their best to
connect with
him. I think I have got to give
them the credit.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You could argue,
of course,
this is a book for parents of
children with
special needs, to some extent.
But it's also really for parents
of all kinds,
parents with all kinds of
children, because
you write about parents today
want their children
to be successful, want their
children to be
happy.
RON FOURNIER: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That really comes
through loud
and clear, that you're saying to
these parents,
wait a minute. Stop before you
get carried
away here.
RON FOURNIER: What I try to do
here was understand
that my problem wasn't Tyler's
autism. My
problem wasn't Tyler. My problem
was me.
I had certain expectations for
my son that
he couldn't meet because of his
condition.
Oh, actually, he couldn't
because he's not
me. I have to help make him the
best that
he can be.
So, then I -- the more parents I
talk to,
the more child development
experts I talk
to, I realize that partly
because of who we
are and the baggage that we
bring into parenthood,
and partly because of the times
that we live
in, which are awfully scary to
raise children,
as you know, we have certain
expectations,
certain pressures that we put on
all of our
kids.
We want them to be geniuses. We
want them
to be popular. We want them to
have successful
careers. We want them to follow
us into our
education paths. We want them to
be happy,
whatever that means.
And the problem is, those
expectations, if
they're misplaced, don't just
shape our kids.
They can misshape our kids.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. And this
desire that
they all go to Harvard, that
they have lot
of friends, they're popular.
RON FOURNIER: Right. Social
scientists will
tell you -- the science will
tell you, you
don't want your kid to be
popular. You don't
want your kids to have a whole
-- a big number
of friends, because that often
puts them in
social situations, puts
pressures upon them
to stay in that A-list category.
That leads
them down the wrong path.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, I want
to ask you,
how is Tyler doing today, and
what does he
think about this book, about the
fact that
you wrote it?
RON FOURNIER: Thanks for asking.
He's doing great. He is going to
graduate
from a public school here in
Arlington very
shortly here in June. And he's
looking forward
to the next step in his life,
which looks
like it's going to be probably a
couple of
community college classes, a
little bit of
work, a little bit of community
service.
It is going to take him a little
bit longer
than a "normal" child to make it
on his own,
but we think he's going to get
there. With
the book, you know, he's a
typical -- first
of all, he's kind of a typical
teenage boy.
He's just involved in his own
life.
But it's even more so with an
Aspie. He's
really just into the present. So
he appreciates
the book. He had full veto
authority over
the book. He likes some of the
attention he's
getting around it. We had a book
party back
in our hometown of Detroit last
week that
he got a kick out of taking part
in that.
But he doesn't want to be a
whole lot of attention.
He jokes that he wants to be a
covert celebrity,
whatever that means.
(LAUGHTER)
RON FOURNIER: So, he's doing
good. Thanks
for asking.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Did he end up
vetoing anything?
RON FOURNIER: Yes, actually,
there was a couple
passages in the book where -- in
the original
manuscript. But, mainly, they
were stylistic,
where he thought I was making
myself look
too smart.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I won't ask you
what you left
out.
Ron Fournier, the book is "Love
That Boy,"
and it really is a remarkable
book. Thank
you.
RON FOURNIER: Thank you so much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Now the latest
edition in
our Brief But Spectacular
series.
Tonight, Laurel Braitman on the
emotional
depths of a howl. A
writer-in-residence at
Stanford Medical School,
Braitman's book "Animal
Madness" explores mental illness
in all creatures.
And her latest project discovers
how music
can be good for even the wildest
souls.
LAUREL BRAITMAN, Author, "Animal
Madness":
I think communicating with other
animals is
exactly like communicating with
other human
animals.
The way to woo a dolphin is
usually just to
be like super sexy and really
outgoing. Dogs
too, you know, they will seem to
be the most
curious and most attracted to
the person that's
least interested in them.
almost all of the same kinds of
mental illnesses
or at least similar to those in
people, so,
everything from post-traumatic
stress disorder
to mood disorders like
depression.
Lots of other creatures have
also wound up
on these drugs, Zoloft, Lexapro,
all kinds
States even have their own
psychiatrists.
We think about them as
entertainment, like
going to the zoo and watching
the elephants.
And one thing that makes me sad
is that we
don't usually think about what
entertains
them.
One of my favorite emotional
experiences is
to listen to music. I wanted to
put on concerts
for other animals, because I had
a feeling
that there was a lot that we
could learn by
watching other animals listen
and respond
to music.
The first music for animal show
I did was
actually for a very lonely
miniature donkey.
He hated it. He ran away. He ate
thistles
and he only came back when we
started playing
bluegrass standards and Nina
Simone.
One of the most recent concerts
was for wolves
at Wolf Haven sanctuary in
Southern Washington.
And that one was awesome,
because these wolves,
most of them, they spent more
than a decade
on a 10-foot chain. They were
part of a roadside
attraction in Alaska.
I thought these wolves deserved
a concert.
So I worked with the band Black
Prairie. My
collaborator Aubree
Bernier-Clarke made a
really beautiful film of it.
They came from
very far away to as close as
they possibly
could be to see the band.
And then, at the end, the band
howled, and
the wolves responded.
(HOWLING)
LAUREL BRAITMAN: I'm just
fascinated by all
this stuff. I think it makes us
better people
to realize that we're animals
just like everyone
else.
By looking into their eyes and
seeing what
they're doing, we really begin
to understand
ourselves.
My name is Dr. Laurel Braitman,
and this is
my Brief But Spectacular take on
animal madness.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Maybe they
will end all
their concerts like that, with a
howl?
JUDY WOODRUFF: I was about to
say, they can't
applaud, but they can howl.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Yes.
You can find more of our Brief
But Spectacular
videos online at
PBS.org/NewsHour/Brief.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And finally
tonight, our "NewsHour"
Shares: something that caught
our eye that
might be of interest to you,
too.
Scientists often travel to the
ends of the
Earth in the name of research,
but Ph.D. student
Kiya Riverman's work requires
her to climb
directly into the heart of
glaciers.
We spoke with Riverman by phone
recently about
exploring caves of ice on
Svalbard -- that's
a set of islands north of
Iceland -- and asked
what she hopes to discover.
KIYA RIVERMAN, Graduate Student,
Penn State
University: My name is Kiya
Riverman. And
I am a graduate student at Penn
State University,
where I study glaciers and ice
sheets and
how they might contribute to sea
level rise.
In a warming world, there's this
potential
for ice to flow out into the
ocean and contribute
to sea level rise. And so
understanding what
controls the way that ice flows
and how that
changes is really of importance.
When I am out in the field, I am
first and
foremost interested in
understanding, what
is the geometry of this glacier,
how thick
is the ice, what's underneath
it, because,
in order to understand how it
might change
in the future, I have to have a
good sense
of what it looks like right now.
Inside the cave systems, the
main thing that
I'm interested in studying is
where there
are waterfalls. So, where water
exists underneath
ice, it can have a big impact on
the way that
ice moves. There haven't really
been good
descriptions of why there are
waterfalls inside
of glaciers.
And so I map where they are and
how they change
through time. And so I'm
specifically answering
these little questions about how
water cuts
through glaciers, in order to
say something
about how increased amounts of
water in the
future will speed them up or
slow them down.
Every time I go in the system,
I'm learning
something new about how water
flows through
glaciers. And it's also just a
fun physical
test of what can I take and
learning the limits
of both the science, but the
limits of my
own body and my ability to be in
this harsh
place.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And a couple
of news updates
before we leave you tonight.
There is word U.S. special
operations troops
have been stationed at outposts
in Libya since
late last year. According to The
Washington
Post, fewer than 25 troops are
trying to enlist
local support for a possible
offensive against
ISIS.
And the U.S. Navy has fired the
commander
of 10 American sailors who were
captured after
warning into Arabs waters this
past January.
The Navy said in a statement it
lost confidence
in the commander's ability.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
Michael Gerson.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.